---
title: "Producing business cases for digital transformation - Benefits of digital transformation Lesson | QA Platform"
source: "https://app.qa.com/course/benefits-digital-transformation-1698/producing-business-cases-digital-transformation/?context_id=13677&context_resource=lp"
author:
  - "[[QA Platform]]"
published:
created: 2025-02-10
description: "Producing business cases for digital transformation - Benefits of digital transformation lesson from QA Platform. Start learning today with our digital training solutions."
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
How an organisation’s purpose and vision is to be achieved is always the relevance by which the value of a digital strategy will be judged and measured. Therefore any initiative as part of a digital strategy and transformation programme will need a business case formed to show how each initiative will contribute to achieving that vision and purpose. 

As part of a well-formed business case for a particular initiative it’s also important to outline the other options that won’t be able to be invested in as a consequence of this particular initiative being committed to. This will give stakeholders the right evidence to make a balanced and informed decision around every business case that is proposed. 

### **Returns and benefits** 

A return is the result of a making a strategic investment. It is calculated by subtracting the costs (financial and non-financial) of the digital initiative proposed from the anticipated benefits (financial and non-financial). Non-financial features should be considered and can also potentially by assigned a monetary value. A non-financial benefit can often be scoped in terms of value for money e.g. increased brand reputation or customer satisfaction. 

It’s important to understand that not all returns occur at once, some will take a particular point to be achieved others will scale as the digital initiative increases in use. Stakeholders approving the business case need to understand the profile of the return and how it might change over time once the digital capabilities are delivered. 

### **Opportunity costs** 

Opportunity cost is a method used to help stakeholders compare one option (e.g. keep the status quo) with another (implement the proposed digital initiative). This helps stakeholders as part of decision making around the proposed business case to better understand what the organisation will lose if it chooses a particular option. 

Opportunity cost is calculated by subtracting the return that would have been generated by the alternative options from the return expected by the digital initiative being proposed. It is important to consider both financial and non-financial aspects in this calculation. 

### **Costs** 

Outlining costs is central to any good business case and breaking down the costs of a digital initiative proposed into various categories will help decision makers. Examples of relevant cost categories are: 

- Capital expenditure
- Operational expenses
- Resource utilisation
- Technology costs
- Audit and compliance costs
- Research and development costs
- Partnership and/or supplier costs

Costs in some organisations also can also be put against the consequential impacts of a proposed digital initiative change, for example, having to retire an existing product as a consequence of a new digital capability being committed to. 

### **Risks** 

A good business case should provide information about the negative risks associated with committing to its recommendations. In addition to the identified risks it should document the risk treatments identified for those risks. Stakeholders can then use this information to decide whether to accept each risk with its recommended treatments or discuss alternatives. When the stakeholders approve the business case, this will ensure they have also accepted the level of risk, and will fund the recommended risk treatments.  

### **Communicating the business case** 

The digital strategy will be widely communicated across an organisation and often aspects shared to external customers and partners. Staff, partners, suppliers, and even consumers, should be told about the impact of the strategy, and what positive impacts are expected as much as any negative ones to avoid. 

Business cases aligned to the strategy will contain cost and return calculations and should only be shared with stakeholders who will approve and fund the strategy.  

### **Business case - format** 

A template for business cases can be useful to agree and use in most organisations to ensure consistency of content and enabling good decision making. 

A potential template of sections would include: 

- Executive summary: a high-level view of the business case.
- Introduction
- Statement of the problem: a straightforward articulation of the problem being solved.
- Analysis: the situation behind the problem, and sufficient details to educate the reader.

List of possible options, identifying potential solutions to the problem described: 

- Benefits: why it would be a good idea to do it.
- Cost: including resource requirements.
- Timescale for the project.
- Return on investment, with an explanation.
- Risks: possible negative outcomes, and those factors that might prevent successful implementation.
- Recommendations for the project and how it is to be conducted.
- Details of the chosen option.
- Conclusion: a reminder of why it is essential in addressing the problem.

### **Business case feedback** 

Any business case decision once communicated to by all appropriate stakeholders should ensure that no surprises occur when approval is then sought for funding. 

Business cases to enable successful execution of a digital strategy are required for the following reasons: 

- There needs to be an auditable approval for any funding allocated to the digital initiative as part of the strategy.
- The business case ensures that no assumptions are made about the availability of funding.
- They ensure that every stakeholder has an opportunity to identify both positive and negative aspects of the strategy and make an informed decision.
- They ensure that all digital initiatives proposed as part of the digital transformation programme are aligned with the overall digital strategy. This will stop silos forming where digital initiatives are committed to an ad-hoc way across the organisation but without the right strategic alignment.

Feedback from every business case being proposed and committed to can then be provided to the leadership team owning the digital strategy, so that necessary adjustments can be made and dependencies checked against. 

In the next step you will be introduced to how you can measure the performance of a proposed digital transformation.