---
title: The IT asset management process - Fundamentals of IT asset management | IT | Lesson | QA Platform
source: https://app.qa.com/course/fundamentals-it-asset-management-it-1698/it-asset-management-process/?context_id=13246&context_resource=lp
author:
  - "[[IT Asset Management]]"
published: 
created: 2024-12-19
description: The IT asset management process - Fundamentals of IT asset management | IT | lesson from QA Platform. Start learning today with our digital training solutions.
tags:
  - clippings
---
Speaker1: It is imperative that every IT asset is managed properly, to ensure that it's being utilised effectively. An IT asset can be defined as any financial valuable resource, component, or capability that can contribute in some way to the delivery of a service or product. What constitutes an IT asset will be decided and documented to ensure consistency. As IT assets are generally something that have an agreed financial value, anything above this value will be an IT asset, and therefore registered in the asset register. Let's now look at how to manage and control IT assets, by working through the four key stages.  

Stage one is to identify the IT assets, but we can't do this until the organisation has defined and agreed it's IT asset management approach. Defining the approach involves communicating with stakeholders to identify the correct scope, data structure, and models that we will use for asset management. In these discussions, things we need to consider include: how much information will we capture and update for each asset type? How will we track assets? What statuses will we use to track the life cycle of assets? What reports are needed from the asset management practice? How will we verify and audit the assets once captured in the asset management database? Once the approach is agreed, this allows us to identify all our assets and the information we need to collect for each of them. We may even have some of the information already stored with local teams in spreadsheets or other databases. The identification of assets is not a one\-off activity; as requests for new assets come in to the organisation the role or roles responsible for asset management will identify the type of asset and confirm if it is within the scope of the asset management practice.  

If it is within scope, it will be captured and managed; this is what we will examine next. In stage two, we capture IT asset data. This information is input into the IT asset register. There may be a number of different registers depending on the type of assets we choose to manage. Let's take a look at the type of information you would want to collect for a hardware asset, for example, a laptop. We might want to collect information such as the asset tag, status, procurement date, price, depreciation, current value, make, model, serial number, and who it is assigned to. Now let's look at the information we might want to collect for a software asset. Information could include the software title, version, license type, license key, vendor information, purchase date, and the purchase cost. Also included in the information we collect will be the status of the asset.  

Which statuses an organisation chooses to use and when an asset enters the asset register will have been agreed in the planning of the IT asset management process. Examples of statuses in use could include available, in repair, on loan, disposed, retired, lost, stolen, and assigned. As an asset goes through its life cycle, the status will change until it is eventually decommissioned and archived from the register. In stage three, we move on to verification. This is a continuous activity of identifying and correcting the gaps between the IT asset data captured and what is actually out there. Discrepancies can be identified in operational day to day worlds in many different ways. Some of the ways we can verify information without a physical audit include service desk, support teams, service level management, and release management. We'll look at some of these in more detail next.  

Take an example of the service desk, which is in constant contact with users. As they log an incident, the service desk will check which asset is affected. Imagine a scenario where the service desk analyst answers a call from Carol Grant who is an employee in the finance department. Carol explains that she's having problems logging in to her laptop. The service desk analyst requests Carol's staff ID so that they can verify her identity. But when they check the asset tag, they find that the laptop is assigned to a different employee. Carol explains that when her colleague recently moved on to a new job, he left behind his work laptop. This laptop worked much better than Carol’s, so she adopted it and started to use it herself. In this case, one quick conversation with the service desk identified discrepancies in the asset information. Other examples include when support teams carry out a fix, they can identify that the asset information is out of date. Also, during review meetings with the customer, the service level manager could identify anomalies with the organisation's registered assets.  

Now let's look at the need to regularly audit the asset register. This is not the same as the verification process, which happens all the time. When we audit, it is planned, structured, and regular. It can be done internally, or by external third parties brought in to do this. There are many tools available on the market to assist with auditing. Some examples include ServiceNow, Asset Panda, SolarWinds, and BMC Track It. Remember, these tools are only useful if the assets are attached to the network, and sometimes we have to revert to the good old\-fashioned way of physically auditing kit or asking end users to provide us with details.  

The idea behind asset management is to maximise cost reduction, reduce risk, and improve decision making. We can do this using reporting. This leads us to explore stage four of the asset management process, which is to provide reports to stakeholders. Reports enable stakeholders to analyse the use of assets. This enables them to: identify idle assets, identify under or over\-licensed software to avoid compliance issues, understand depreciation of assets and when we should replace older resources, optimise asset life cycles, use asset tracking, and gain visibility. To wrap up, here is the IT asset management process showing all four stages. Identify IT assets, capture IT asset data, verification, audit, and provide reports to stake holders. Remember that IT asset management can be linear or non\-linear. IT asset management plays an important role in ensuring an organisation’s overall efficiency, cost control, compliance, and decision making. It allows an organisation to get the best from their assets, whether they are physical or digital.